[MUSIC]
>> Ben Callahan: All right, so 101.
We started off with this idea,
the web is not fixed width.
A couple more stats for
you really quickly here.
In the United States,
the penetration of desktop and
laptop ownership is the same
today as it was In 2007.
What that means is that all
the growth we're seeing is in mobile.
I mean you guys know this right.
But you've probably seen this stat
that orange line represents the growth
of mobile browsing.
So end of 2013, beginning in 2014,
it's predicted that more people
will be browsing the web on mobile devices
than on your desktop or laptop computer.
That's coming really fast.
You know this is triple digit
growth that we're seeing?
My clients are seeing year
over year from small devices.
So this stuff is coming really fast and
really what it means the truth is that.
Flexibility has to be the new normal for
us.
And if you've looked at your
analytics you'll realize this, too.
That people are already trying to browse
your sites on these devices, right?
And one way to address that,
that we're gonna spend the rest of the day
talking about, is responsive web design.
So quick definition and
sort of a little bit of information
about where this all started.
You guys know Ethan Marcotte
coined this phrase?
In an article,
that he wrote in Alistapart,
just over two years ago, in May.
And this is a is a great article.
Who's read this Responsive
of Web Design on Alistapart?
If you haven't read this, go check it out.
I mean, this is like the starting.
This is where this whole
kind of idea started.
And Ethan is incredibly eloquent,
great writer,
just one of the nicest guys
you'll ever meet online.
And he's incredibly just really
defines it very succinctly.
He also recently has written
a book by the same title,
Responsive Web Design
through A Book Apart.
It's a nice short read, and it covers
all this stuff in pretty good detail.
I would certainly recommend
that you pick that up as well.
The way that Ethan defines responsive
is really there's three
kind of core techniques.
And you'll see as we get into this that
these are all primarily happening in CSS.
So he talks about a fluid foundation.
The idea that we need to
shift away from pixels and
fixing widths in our layouts and start
to use a more proportionate thinking.
He talks about flexible content.
Once the layout systems are flexible,
the content we put in those layout
systems also has to adjust.
And media queries,
when we find a place where the design and
the layout no longer work well with
the content that we've put into them.
We can to make larger adjustments in our
layout through the use of media queries.
We're gonna talk about
all these in detail.
So a fluid foundation.
Honor of the proportions of the design
by creating percentage-based grids.
Instead of fixed-width pixel based grids.
I wanna take this into some code quickly
and just get some really, really,
simple examples in front of us.
So we can make sure we are all
on the same page here.
So this is a really kind of a typical
way that you might see grid systems
being done these days.
Using classes on a div and
some sort of a class.
In this case I just chose span-1.
That indicates that this div is a
container that should be one column wide.
And then span-2 is two column
span three three columns.
So if you can imagine that each of these
are say 100 pixels each column say
100 pixels wide.
We have a 300 pixel column grid,
really simple, right?
300 pixel wide grid.
And then in your CSS,
you might do something like this
span-1 has a width the 90 pixels.
We're kind of assuming that the there's
maybe a 10 pixel gutter or something.
So that adds up to 100.
For span-2,
we would do 190 with that same ten pixels.
Really simple, right?
What we need to think about when we shift
to this more fluid of a fluid foundation
is how do we convert that
into percentages instead.
And so in the case where our
context is 300 pixel wide and
we have a 90 pixel-wide element.
We wanna use a little bit of math.
And Ethan kinda walks through all this
in his introductory article there.
He talks about this
idea of target/context.
Really, we're just
calculating a percentage.
And so for our specific case, 90 divided
by 300 is 0.3, which is 30 %.
30% for
one column of a 300 pixel-wide grid.
So this is theoretical.
Let's jump into some
code really quickly here.
>> Ben Callahan: Can you guys see
the code all right in the back there?
Large enough?
Yeah, Okay.
So what I've got, this is in
repository if you wanna jump in here.
There is a z01-RWD 101 folder and
inside that are five different HTML files.
We're gonna start kind of walking
through these one at a time.
br-1.html is what we're looking at here.
If I scroll down to the body
of this of this file,
you'll see really all I have is some
spans, some divs with a class of span.
Just dead simple here, okay?
We''ll just put a tiny bit
of text inside each one.
If I open this up in the browser,
this is kinda what it looks like, okay?
What we're doing here.
Right in the head of this document,
I've got a little bit of css.
Quick caveat,
obviously, you shouldn't be putting all of
your CSS in the head of your documents.
This is just an example, okay [LAUGH]?
But you can see I've given the body
itself or width of 300 pixels.
I'm centering it with just a margin.
And then each of the spans, span-1, 2, and
3, I've given a height of, a min height,
just so that we can see them.
And then flow to them left with and
they all have a margin right and
bottom of 10 pixels, okay?
And then span-1 is 90 pixels wide
with background color of red.
Span-2, 190, span-3,
290 different colors on the background.
And all that comes together to give
us something beautiful like this.
So obviously this is sort of our
fixed width version of this.
What we'd like to do is start to think
about how can we adjust this grid.
Adjust these simple styles in the head
of this document to make this
percentage based instead of pixel based.
So I'm going to I'm gonna open up
that slide that I just showed you
guys that had the target
of a context math.
And I'm gonna give you guys a few minutes
to actually play with this file itself.
You can open this index file
up directly in your browser.
You don't need to be running local host or
anything and
you can see just literally
just drag in your browser.
It'll open up and go at that code
quickly modify br-1.html and
try to add some percentages in.
And so
that this thing will flex a bit, okay?
Anybody have questions on what
they're supposed to be doing?
Okay, and just holler if you would like
to discuss or have a question, okay?
>> Ben Callahan: You wanna to modify
anything that impacts the width.
>> Ron: Do you use 90 or 100?
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> Ben Callahan: For your body?
>> Ron: Yeah.
>> Ben Callahan: So
the question about what percentage
should we be using on the body element?
You can really pick anything you want.
When I do this on my post,
I set it at 9, so
there's a little bit of
something on the other side.
But we'll take a look at that,
too, here in just a minute.
Good question.
If you don't modify the width of the body,
then in the end,
it should sort of look the same
if you've done your math right.
If you leave that body
set to 300 pixels and
you adjust all the widths of
the columns to be percentage based.
They're still inside of
a fixed-width container.
So it should look the same
as it does in the fixed
width mode.
>> Ben Callahan: Okay,
let's take a quick look here.
So the way this is gonna run
here is that I've got br-1,
which is kinda where we started.
br-2 is actually a modified
version of br-1 and
I've gone ahead and
made some changes to these widths.
So we'll walk through quickly.
Again, I haven't changed anything
in the body at all, okay?
Just made some changes in the style
block in the head of that ofbr-2.
So I opted to set the body
to a width of 90%.
And I down here for the margin right for
all three of these elements.
I did 10 because this was 10 pixels.
10 over 300 gives us this repeating 3.333.
I put in five decimal places here.
And we're gonna talk a little bit about
rounding in some older browsers and
how this impacts layouts.
span-1 was 30% which we which we kind of
figured out in the actual slide there.
span-2, 63.3 repeating.
Again, the math is just in
the comment to the right.
And span-3, 96.6 repeating.
So now when we take a look
at this in a browser.
Here's our original fixed width layout and
here is the same layout but
using percentages.
>> Ben Callahan: See, you can kinda
see this adjusts its width now, right?
So now we've modified.
We've shifted mentality from this
fixed sort of pixel-based layout
to start to think about
things in proportions.
This is what I meant when I said in that
first slide to honor the proportions of
the design, okay?
And one thing that actually you asked,
what's your name?
>> Ron: Ron.
>> Ben Callahan: Ron was asking earlier
about what should we set the width of
the body to?
Well, in a case where I'm actually
modifying of a fixed-width design
to make it percentage-based.
A lot of times, I'll leave the wrapper
a container set to fixed-width.
Just to be able to sort of think,
see if I did my math work out right.
So if I switch this back to 300 pixels,
okay?
I'm in br-2.
If I do that and refresh and
then sort of switch between these two.
You'll see there slight
difference here but
generally this is a very very close
to what the original was okay.
So that's one little kind of technique
you can use just to make sure that your
math actually worked out right.
And you could do this.
This could be any percent.
So if I choose 50%.
It'll stay, it'll basically leave
25% on either side of that column.
So again, very simple.
So let's see here.
>> Ron: The 300 came from
the original body size, correct?
>> Ben Callahan: Yeah, so
in the context of a 300 pixel wide grid,
each column is 100 pixels.
So what we need to do is figure out
what percentage is 100 of the 300.
So that it can extend beyond once
our container changes its width.